I met Dr. Owen Flanagan after hearing his lecture
titled, "Is Happiness Possible?" at a happiness conference.
He calls himself a Platonic hedonist,
the emphasis on hedonist.
In fact, he says hedonism is misunderstood word,
that it can help pave a path to happiness, in fact.
He knows this, as he has had contact
with some of the brightest minds on the planet,
including the Dalai Lama.
In 1989, as a scholar on the subjects of Western psychology
and philosophy, Owen was selected to educate
the Dalai Lama as to the nature of emotions in the West.
(relaxing piano music)
I was listening to your talk
a little while ago and the question was,
"Is happiness possible?"
and you were specifically focusing on the West.
How were you assigned this one?
I think I was assigned it in 1999,
I had the same assignment.
I was in Costa Rica and I got a phone call
from my secretary at Duke saying that the
Dalai Lama wanted me to come over there
and I said, "Yeah, a likely story," and my job there,
in 1999 when I went over, was I did in fact have
a real invitation, but my job was to teach
the Dalai Lama about Western views about the emotions.
So I had no, at that time, involvement in Buddhism
or anything like, so I really went over there
and talked to him about Western views about the emotions
and especially the idea that we believe, in the West,
in retributive anger and things like that,
that is unlike the East or at least--
Was he surprised to hear this?
He kind of knew about it.
That's what my job was: to have an official degree
that could tell him that, in fact, what he thought
about Western views was true. (laughing)
So that began a time when I sort of go among
people, Buddhists, but also overseas a lot,
I'm asked to talk about Western views about ethics
and happiness and things like that,
so that's how I get assigned that
and Jinpa, since he's the Dalai Lama's English interpreter,
he always does the--
Beautiful being.
Eastern things. He is a wonderful person.
And so, can you expand on how
the Dalai Lama responded as you explained to him
the nature of our psyche?
Well, I told him things. I remember a few moments.
I said to him, here are two important moments
in my conversations. One was when I said to him,
I said, "Some people in the West, when they think
about human nature, think that we're either,
some people think that we're completely selfish
like Thomas Hobbes did. So Hobbes said, "Life in the
state of nature, if we let out our natural selves,
is nasty, brutish and short, because there's a war
of each against each. You're watching what I have
and I'm watching what you have and I want what you have
and you want what I have."
So, I explained that to him and he had heard about that too.
And then I said, a few people say that we're part egoist
and partly compassionate, but no one
ever has said in the West that we're innately compassionate
like you said. Now he was a little bit surprised about that,
although he did say, in response, he said,
"Well I don't quite believe that we're really
sort of innately nice. It's more that we have the capacity.
And really, in the Buddhist way,
they expand on and they spend a great deal of time
developing that capacity. Is that?
Absolutely, yeah, so there's long traditions
in enhancing and growing that capacity
and one interesting thing is, what's the arguement
for growing that capacity as opposed to
some other capacity, like in Chinese tradition,
you'll get things like growing filial piety or
respect for your elders and your family.
We don't see that as much in something like Buddhism
and you don't see the Buddhist emphasis
on extreme compassion and loving-kindness
in Western, say Greek, ethics. You just don't see it.
And speaking of, when you were speaking
earlier today, you were talking about Aristotle's view,
for example, of what a definition of happiness might be.
And can you explain that a little bit, just so
we can get a little better look at where we're coming from.
Okay, so, there's this period that philosopher,
Karl Jasper, it's called the Axial Age.
It's like, why all of a sudden do Plato and Aristotle
in Ancient Greece, Confucius and his students
over in China, and the Buddha, what's going on
in the 5th to 6th century BCE that these
great wisdom traditions, possibly even the Hebrew Bible,
some people will place around the same time.
Give or take a hundred years, we're talking about
a pretty exciting time.
So, Aristotle, who's Plato's teacher.
I mean, Plato is his teacher, sorry.
and Socrates of course is Plato's teacher,
so they're in a lineage. They seem to be the first people
in the West to focus seriously on the possibility
that there's something called, what we would
now call happiness, that's in the cards for humans
that doesn't depend on what
god or gods have in store for you.
So this is why I call Aristotle the first naturalist.
He doesn't have a god in his view,
but he has this idea that humans, just like acorns
have in their future becoming an oak tree if they get lucky,
plants have in their future growing to be
a full, beautiful plant of whatever,
so therein his question is, "What does
a fully grown, fully developed human being become?"
And his idea is that we're animals
that can grow reason and virtue
and that if we grow those, then we are about
as fulfilled as any person could be.
So the word eudaimonia, with an eu- prefix,
means happy, or it's usually translated
as happy or positive.
And then the -demon is a word for a spirit,
so it's happy-spirited, although Aristotle's view
didn't seem to involve, like, being overtaken
by little sort of spirits. It was more the
state of your mind and character
would be of the sort of a flourishing person.
So, then the idea was. at least when I was a
graduate student, we talked about happiness,
eudaimonia being happiness. That's what people
translated it as and then finally,
in the mid-70s, people said, "Well, that might be
the wrong thing because we, Americans in particular,
think about happiness as a subjective feeling state."
Right, a mood.
A mood, and the idea is that no, maybe,
and what Aristotle didn't seem to have in mind
was a mood state, although that's not bad
if you're still--
He was looking more to human potentials.
He was looking to human potential.
In fact, his whole theory is a theory about
actualizing our potential, so he was like
the first human development, human potential
movement person, you could say.
But at the same time, he,
as you were saying, has somewhat of an elitist view
of this and can you talk about that for a moment.
Right, yeah, so Aristotle talks about the view
of, we need to know what eudeimonia is as conceived
by experts, the few, not the many, because the many,
the word hoi paloi means "the people" in Greek,
so you don't want to just know what the hoi paloi think
'cause they'll tell you all kinds of stuff like,
that it's money or it's reputation.
And, Plato and Aristotle both, a lot of their discussions
and dialogues and treatises are about the ordinary
Greek conception of what makes people flourish
and they're against that, so when Socrates
has to die, one of his students comes and says,
"Let's get you out of jail, otherwise our
reputation is going to suffer,"
and Socrates says there, "You don't need to worry
about what ordinary people think about
our reputation, we only need to worry about
what the other experts think."
So philosophy is filled with people who have
sort of elitist attitudes. Now, the problem is,
well the question is, is that a problem?
Do ordinary people, is it a question about
that everyone has a right to answer, namely
what makes for a good life? Or are there some experts?
And you see this again and again in philosophy.
So John Stuart Mill in the 19th century,
he says if you're wondering about two courses of action,
ask the expert who's done both and trust the
expert more than the person who's never tried both.
So, but Aristotle's idea is that there are, like
having excellent friendships, he divided friendships
into three types. There were friendships of utility.
That's like what you have with people you do business with.
Those don't survive if you have
no other reason to do business.
There are friendships of pleasure, like just
sexual relationship, and then there are
true friendships where you love the other
as another self and Aristotle says again and again,
most people don't know about true friendship,
but it's better.
And you can say, the argument would be,
I've had all three, and trust me, the handful of
true friendships are the best.
I know this is something that has emerged
throughout this conference, happiness and its causes,
is this notion of true friendship.
If we go, let's for a moment, before we go further into
that, we go to Plato, and this is where the notion
of truth and beauty and goodness starts coming into play.
Right, yeah, so Plato starts off this whole idea
and people talk about Plato having these ideal forms
and Plato's heaven, there's the good, the true
and the beautiful. So one way I like to think about it is
that Plato at least proposes the idea that
moral goodness, that's how I think of goodness,
like being a really good person, going for
aesthetic pleasures, those could be pleasures of the body,
pleasures of art, pleasures of music,
and the pleasures of science, that's the true.
So think of science as what tells us
the truth about the world. That's where I bring in
Darwin and neuroscience because
I think that's our best theories that we have right now
about our nature is the view we get from Charles Darwin
who says that we're just animals.
We're very sophisticated animals,
but we're animals at the end of the day.
Neuroscience says the site of the mind
is in the brain, so we get there on the truthful side.
We get our views about beauty and so on and so forth.
That's more transcendent though, really,
when you get into the notions of beauty.
Well, it is, I don't know if it's transcendent, I mean
this is where I come from is sort of,
this is the naturalist image.
I think we have ideas about what gives pleasure.
I think of beauty actually as the science of
what are the best pleasures, okay.
Now it might get transcendent, but here's my ideal:
It would be nice, this is where what I call
Platonistic hedonism comes in,
I think the best life to live is a life where you
seek out the truth, the good, and the beautiful,
and I like to think that those could go together,
but a lot of people tell me all the time,
people who buy into certain religious beliefs, for example,
that no, the truth is a problem.
People don't want to know the truth,
and this is an interesting question. You see--
And what about the pleasures?
Well the pleasure is, some people say pleasures are bad
and I think that they're making a mistake.
I think some people overrate the ethical, the
giving to other people part of life.
I think that, you know, there's a kind of a life,
at least the life I choose is a life in balance
where I seek all these things together.
Now, some other people would say, "Well, when it comes to
pleasure, the aesthetic dimension, against doing good,
wouldn't a eudaimon, a flourishing person,
always choose the ethical?"
I'm not so sure. I don't think it's clearcut
what you should choose.
And there's a lot of debate about that here.
There's a lot, I don't know if there's too much
debate here. I think at least, well among my friends
on my panel, that the view is that to be happy,
you have to be the ethical has the priority
and there's a big debate in philosophy, goes back.
Kierkegaard had this sort of question of either, or.
Aren't there just two different lives, the life,
I mean, what's a better life?
Picasso, Goghan, or the life of Mother Teresa?
I go for Picasso and Goghan any day of the week,
but that just tells you about my preferences.
You call yourself a
Platonic Darwinian hedonist. (laughing)
Right, well, I actually mostly call myself
a Platonic hedonist, but the idea is that
the pleasures I seek, and I think we're all
pleasure-seeking animals, so that's the Darwinian part,
we're animals, involved what I like to think
could be the intersection of those three things together,
but people tell me that I'm naive,
that most people don't want to know the truth.
I think that's an interesting empirical question.
That is, indeed.
When we look at this, it is another subject that you
brought up earlier, was the luxury of having
the space and the time, the clear mental space even,
for the pursuit of happiness.
There's a certain threshold at which a person has to
achieve before this is even really an option in life.
Can you talk a little bit about that?
Sure. According to the most recent statistics
of the World Bank, 25% of the people in the world
live in a condition called absolute poverty.
No one in America has to live in a situation
of absolute poverty. Some people who are on
streets who are severely ill will sometimes
find themselves in the equivalent of a situation,
but there are social safety net structures in place.
Soup kitchens or housing.
But for one in four people on Earth,
that's one point three or four billion people,
they don't have the basic necessities of life
and I think this is actually an area in which
people, Westerners, we're nation-state chauvinists.
So when we do worry about the wellbeing of other people,
it tends not to go beyond the borders of our country
and I think we see this again and again and again.
Sometimes there are practical reasons only to worry
about the other people in your country
and some people say, well, if you see someone
who's really suffering, then do something.
But there are philosophers I know, for example,
philosopher Peter Singer of Princeton,
he gives up 50 to 60% of his income to
poor and he thinks that that's a moral duty
we all have and if we were paying attention,
we would all do it and he's a, what we call in philosophy,
a utilitarian. He believes that your
moral responsibility is to promote
the greatest amount of happiness
for the greatest number of people in the long run.
That's a kind of hedonism as far as I'm concerned.
Hedonism has a bad name.
People will say, "Oh hedonists, all they care about
are momentary pleasures."
No, there are hedonists who care
about long-standing pleasures.
Michelangelo, you could call him a hedonist, right?
He was willing to really give what it took
to paint the Sistine Chapel and to have that creative,
the pleasure that he gained from doing that.
So I think a lot of great artists are hedonists in my sense,
non in the sex, drugs and rock 'n' roll sense.
So, give us a very succinct definition
of hedonism from your view.
Well, hedonism means literally--
From your view.
Well, from my view is well, that, hedonism
just is the pursuit of pleasure.
Then the question is, "What kinds of pleasures
are the good ones to seek?"
And I think that there are heirachies of pleasures,
so I think that momentary pleasures,
just in virtue of being momentary,
are not as satisfying as long-term pleasures.
What kind of long-term pleasures are there?
Well, there are the long-term pleasures of
true friendship, loving the other as a self.
Having Paul Ekman today talking about that
concept from Yiddish, nachas, was the thing,
but it's like the desire of each generation
to create a future generation,
the pleasures of knowing that, in some sense,
your spirit goes on in children or the next generation.
It doesn't have to be one's own children,
but it could be the next generation,
knowing that one is doing well to make a world
a pleasant place for the next generation.
So I think people in America are kind of prudish
about pleasures, but it's because we associate
pleasure with all the pleasures
that just aren't that interesting.
Right, rather than, as you say, a higher
pursuit, say as, what you were saying Peter Singer
is offering the world, which is, it is his pleasure to
donate 50, 60% of his salary to
end the suffering of other people.
Yeah, exactly right--
And so that goes back into
truth, beauty and goodness.
That's right--
It feeds back--
Well that's what I think about it as,
in other words, it's not a...
You know, there is like, I say to my students,
I say well, "If the class was divided into 50% of you
were sadists and 50% of you were masochists,
then you could have a local sadomasochist club
and that would be pleasant, and it's true.
I mean, they would both be getting pleasure.
The question is, is that the kind of pleasure
you want to seek day and night?
Well, probably not, even if you're a sadomasochist,
or a sadist and a masochist, that isn't the kind of pleasure
that is really pleasant for the long run,
or at least it has its place, possibly, but
it's not going to be like being around excellent music
or excellent art or excellent philosophy
or excellent mathematics.
I mean, these are quirky things, it's like
Darren this morning was talking about the word
for happy comes from the word for luck.
These are things that mother nature,
this is where the Darwinism gets complicated,
mother nature didn't care that we'd be good
at all these things that we turn out to be good at,
but they do give us high pleasures.
And, it seems to me, given the fact that,
this is where the Darwinism comes in,
given the fact that there's no reason to believe
that we individually go on beyond our lifespan,
everybody thinks who's a serious biologist,
that the human species will be extinct someday.
So then the question is, well, what do we live for?
And it seems to me that we live for some kind of,
both in our own lifetime, the rules change.
We live for a certain kind of self-development,
cultivation of ourselves as the
best creatures we can be, seeding for the
future generations of humans, but also
seeding for the future of the world and
that's all we can do.
The cosmos will go on, probably, after we're gone, but.
Likely.
Likely, yeah.
How do you view this in
very contemporary terms when we're looking at
a vast portion of the planet has really
stepped headlong into materialism,
deeply into materialism, and now we're
watching that world change with the global recession,
if not depression, looming and unfolding before us.
What are you seeing in terms of the value of asking
these questions about happiness and fulfillment
in light of what's going on around us right now?
Well, I think that one thing we know from some of
the research that I have written about recently,
I think I mentioned it this morning, that
material goods over above a certain threshold,
don't bring much of an increase in happiness.
Now, they do bring some increase, actually.
So, but--
It was rather marginal.
$10,000, about $10,000 then it's like
not a lot that's added by amount--
Over 10,000, which is--
Yeah, across the world, which is way below
poverty level in America. It's way below, so
the, I guess the idea would be that you don't
find a big increment once you get above about $10,000.
You need the, that's the level of absolute poverty, in--
Were you surprised to find
that threshold was that low?
I wasn't. Well, I've been watching this
research for a long time, so I guess I wasn't surprised,
but I don't remember when I first learned it, but the--
But that's wonderful, that's wonderful to--
It's important to know so that what is a little bit
of a pathology that we have in the West about always
increase, increase, increase--
A 20% increase--
A 20% increase in salary or just keep the world
being more and more productive, or we need it
to be more and more productive.
I mean, there comes a time where we're seeing it
with the environmental problems.
There's diminishing returns on what we're doing.
And the appetite is insatiable. Doesn't it--
Well this is what's always been interesting to me:
Thomas Hobbes, in chapter 13 of his great book Leviathan,
people always read Hobbes as saying this,
"If people have the same desires for material things
and they have the same abilities to get them,
and there's scarcity, then there will be conflict."
So some people think, well, "Let's get rid of the scarcity
and then there won't be conflict,"
but there is this possibility that humans'
desires are insatiable, as you say.
Then you don't need external scarcity.
It just has to be that you have more than I do
and then, my nature alone will put us into competition.
I don't think this is an impossible view about humans.
In other words, this is where I think that
I take the science very seriously.
I look at what psychologists, neuroscientists,
and evolutionary biologists say.
We're not made by angels.
We're made like other mammals and
that makes us quirky and--
Still have a little bit
of that competitive--
Well, we're kind of mixed bags from a moral point of view.
I mean, there's a lot of great wisdom literature out there.
There's a Chinese philosopher, who I love, named
Hsun Tzu and he has a title of
a chapter called "People Are Bad." (laughing)
Well, that's kind of extreme, but we're very plastic.
This is the thing about the neuroplasticity--
I was just going to ask you that.
You're an optimist because of this.
Let's talk about neuroplasticity.
Yeah, well, the research show, I again wasn't
really surprised by this 'cause I've been studying
mind science for a long time, but
we know people can learn.
We know people can change.
How much we can change our nature
is an interesting question.
We know we can change it a lot by prostheses.
So, for example, in 1600, lenses were
basically just being in invented,
so I can't read without eyeglasses.
I might be an illiterate person if it wasn't for eyeglasses,
so eyeglasses have extended my consciousness
in some important sense.
We know that our iPhones and computers
have externalized our memories,
so those are just technological ways, to,
as it were, maybe enhance ourselves,
but maybe, some people say, "Well, that's a
diminishment of ourselves."
Meanwhile, it was thought, until about 20 years ago,
that brain cells only die as you get older.
Now there's plenty of evidence that some are regenerated,
but even if they're not regenerated
at the same rate as they die.
That's the bad news.
But, making neuronal connections, new connections
among circuits is entirely possible.
Now the question is, and we know
we're doing this all the time.
If you play a musical instrument, you're doing it.
If you play tennis, you're doing it.
If you study anything, you're doing it.
Foreign languages, you're doing it?
Foreign languages, you're doing it.
There's now a lot of focus on the effects
of these contemplative techniques and
we'll see how that pans out.
I've done a lot of research on this
and, in fact, I published an article in May of 2003
in the New Scientist saying that there had been
one person studied, a Buddhist contemplative
who I know, and that his brain lit up
more in the happiness department than other people
and I said this was tantalizing.
The next morning were my 15 Warhol
minutes of fame because I got called
from the Associated Press, Reuters,
Canadian Broadcasting System.
The all asked me how did I discover
the happiness center in Buddhist brains?
So, and, it was preposterous.
The data aren't just there yet to show that
any particular practices, but, as you said,
anything we do reconfigures our brains.
That, but, I--
That leads us to be hopeful.
It leads us to be hopeful, but I actually still
personally think the place to look for the changes
that we need are in the external world, in social practices.
Yes.
That's, because that's what changes the brains the most.
I mean, having educational systems that work well,
having children who exercise, having people
who have good diets.
These are much more important than
people sitting around with a lot
of free time and doing meditation.
But doesn't it take a little plasticity
in the brain just to understand that these
should be our focal points and our priorities in life?
Shifting away from the traditional materialistic view
that we know about and maybe billions of people now
have started, have developed, or been hanging onto?
You may well be right.
If the point is, if we pay attention to,
I guess I would worry, I think you're right,
but my concern would be something like this:
that we always look for quick fixes,
so if people think you don't have to change
the economy, but that people of all different
socioeconomic groups can sit around and do meditation
and that will make them nicer, kinder, better people,
or you don't have to change the schools, then I worry.
It's a little bit like, and then we can give pills
for the ones who don't want to work on that,
so we're not changing the structures of everyday life.
But that's reprioritizing
to understand those things need revamping.
Revamping, I think that's right--
It's a practical application, but there are
implications on the other side
that actually lead to this state we call happiness
or maybe just leading to what we call
a meaningful life, by coming to grips with some of these.
Right. Well, as I said at the beginning of my talk
this morning, the key thing, to me, is not whether
people actually feel happy subjectively,
although that's nice. I mean, the best of
all possible worlds, people would feel happy
about their lives, but whether or not
people feel as if they have a sense of
purposefulness, meaningfulness, whether
they've made a difference to the world,
that they have a little bit of involvement.
I agree. Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you very much.
Dr. Flanagan has authored a number of books,
which you can find by going to Amazon
or other major booksellers.
Meanwhile, if you like Owen's perspective
on happiness, you might also enjoy our
interviews with Peter Russell and Russell Targ.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(light jazz piano music)